OSDOCS-19226 updated release notes for minor release 1.0.1 (#110523)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/zero-trust-manager-release-notes-1-0-0.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * security/zero_trust_workload_identity_manager/zero-trust-manager-install.adoc
:_mod-docs-content-type: REFERENCE
[id="zero-trust-manager-release-notes-1-0-0_{context}"]
= {zero-trust-full} 1.0.0 (General Availability)

Issued: 12 December 2025

[role="_abstract"]
This release introduces capabilities for enterprise readiness, security, and operational flexibility. The release includes SPIRE federation for cross-cluster identity, PostgreSQL support for production persistence, and enhanced security through stricter constraints and API validation.

> The following advisories are available for the {zero-trust-full}

Reviewer: This sentence should end in a colon, and there should be a blank line after so the bullet list renders correctly in the preview:
```suggestion
The following advisories are available for the {zero-trust-full}:

```

Author: Done

Common configuration consolidation::

* Standard configuration options (`labels`, `resources`, `affinity`, `tolerations`, `nodeSelector`) are now standardized across all operand CRs via a shared `CommonConfig` structure.

Configuring log level and log format for the operands::

This release introduces flexible logging controls to improve observability and debugging across the platform:

* SPIRE Components: Users can now configure the `logLevel` (debug, info, warn, error) and `logFormat` (text, JSON) independently for `SpireServer`, `SpireAgent`, and `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider` directly within their CR specifications. The defaults are set to "info" for the `logLevel` and "text" for the `logFormat`.

* Operator: The Operator’s log verbosity is now configurable via the `OPERATOR_LOG_LEVEL` environment variable using klog’s `textlogger`.

Refactor for create-only mode::

By setting the `CREATE_ONLY_MODE` environment variable, users can prevent the Operator from reconciling updates. This allows for manual resource modification without interference. If this mode is disabled, the Operator resumes enforcing the state and overwrites any manual changes.

> == Status and observability improvements

Reviewer: This needs an ID:

```suggestion
[id="zero-trust-manager-1-0-0-status-improvements_{context}"]
== Status and observability improvements
```

(I just chose an ID based on others I saw in this file, but you can choose whatever)

Author: Done

Enhanced status reporting::

* The main CR now aggregates status information from all operand CRs.

* New status conditions include Upgradeable (indicating a safe upgrade path) and Progressing (detailing deployment progress).

Operator metrics::

* Operator metrics are now exposed and secured with appropriate RBAC configuration.

* Integration is supported with the {product-title} monitoring stack.

[id="zero-trust-manager-1-0-0-bug-fixes_{context}"]
== Fixed issues

Enhanced Security Context Constraints for SPIRE Agent::
+
* Before this update, the SPIRE Agent and SPIFFE CSI Driver containers were running as root user, leading to potential security violations. With this release, Security Context Constraints (SCC) have been configured to ensure these components no longer run as root. While privileged container mode is still required for necessary capabilities, this change reduces potential security risks for the user.
+
(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SPIRE-60[SPIRE-60])

> SpireServer updates now propagate without operator restart::

Reviewer: operator should be capitalized here:
```suggestion
SpireServer updates now propagate without Operator restart::
```

Author: Done

+

> * Before this update, the Operator failed to trigger reconciliation after updating the operand CR spec. As a consequence, user updates to `SpireServer` CR resources were not propagated to the `StatefulSet`, causing reconciliation to fail and changes to be ignored, leading to inconsistent resource allocation. With this release, the race condition between the manager and reconciler's cache to trigger reconciliation after CR updates has been fixed. As a result, post installation patch operations on `SpireServer` CRs reliably trigger reconciliation, ensuring updated values are applied to the StatefulSet without manual operator restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Before this update, the Operator failed to trigger reconciliation after updating the operand CR spec. As a consequence, user updates to `SpireServer` CR resources were not propagated to the `StatefulSet`, causing reconciliation to fail and changes to be ignored, leading to inconsistent resource allocation. With this release, the race condition between the manager and reconciler's cache to trigger reconciliation after CR updates has been fixed. As a result, post installation patch operations on `SpireServer` CRs reliably trigger reconciliation, ensuring updated values are applied to the StatefulSet without manual Operator restart.
```

Author: Done

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//

> // * security/zero_trust_workload_identity_manager/zer-trust-manager-install.adoc

Reviewer 2: Check this comment for typo in all mods.

Author: Done

:_mod-docs-content-type: REFERENCE

> [id="zero-trust-manager-release-notes-1-0-0"]

Author: Done

= {zero-trust-full} 1.0.0 (General Availability)

> 

Reviewer 3: role abstract missing. Check similar sections.

Author: I see the role abstract already there

> Issued: 2025-12-17

Reviewer 3: This date format will not cause any confusion. 

A format like "17 December 2025" might alleviate any confusion.

Author: Updated all modules

[role="_abstract"]

> This release introduces capabilities for enterprise readiness, security, and operational flexibility. It includes SPIRE federation for cross-cluster identity, PostgreSQL support for production persistence, and enhanced security through stricter constraints and API validation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This release introduces capabilities for enterprise readiness, security, and operational flexibility. The release includes SPIRE federation for cross-cluster identity, PostgreSQL support for production persistence, and enhanced security through stricter constraints and API validation.
```

Author: Done

* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23438[RHBA-2025:23438]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23439[RHBA-2025:23439]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23440[RHBA-2025:23440]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23441[RHBA-2025:23441]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23442[RHBA-2025:23442]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23443[RHBA-2025:23443]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23446[RHBA-2025:23446]

{zero-trust-full} supports the following components and versions:

[cols="1,1",options="header"]
|===
| Component
| Version

| SPIRE Server
| 1.13.3

| SPIRE Agent
| 1.13.3

| SPIRE Controller Manager
| 0.6.3

| SPIRE OIDC Discovery Provider
| 1.13.3

| SPIFFE CSI Driver
| 0.2.8
|===

[id="zero-trust-manager-1-0-0-features-enhancements_{context}"]
== New features and enhancements

SPIRE federation support::

The Operator now includes support for SPIRE federation, enabling workloads across distinct trust domains to securely communicate and authenticate with each other.

* Key capabilities:

** Configuration of bundle endpoints using `https_spiffe` (TLS) or `https_web` (Web PKI) profiles.

> ** Automatic certificate management via the ACME protocol (e.g., Let's Encrypt).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** Automatic certificate management through the ACME protocol. For example, `Let's Encrypt`.
```

Author: Done

PostgreSQL database support::

SPIRE Server now supports PostgreSQL as an external database backend, accommodating production deployments that necessitate enterprise-grade data persistence and high availability.

* Supported Types: `sqlite3` (default), `postgres`, `mysql`.

* Customer action required:

** For production, evaluation of migration from SQLite to PostgreSQL is recommended.
** Creation and configuration of Kubernetes Secrets for database TLS certificates and credentials are required.

Configurable agent socket path and Container Storage Interface (CSI) plugin name::

The SPIRE Agent socket path and the SPIFFE CSI Driver plugin name are now configurable, providing operational flexibility for environments with specific directory requirements or co-existence with multiple SPIFFE deployments.

* Key configuration points:

** `SpireAgent.spec.socketPath`
** `SpiffeCSIDriver.spec.agentSocketPath`
** `SpiffeCSIDriver.spec.pluginName`

* Customer action required:

** Ensure consistency between `socketPath` in the `SpireAgent` CR and `agentSocketPath` in the `SpiffeCSIDriver` CR.

Workload attestors verification API::

> A new API has been introduced to configure kubelet certificate verification for workload attestation, enhancing security and supporting various OpenShift configurations.

Reviewer 2: Double check "OpenShift" appearances for opportunities to use `product-title` or other language.

Author: Updated in a few places

* Key validations:

** All Operator CRDs are enforced as singletons (must be named `cluster`).
** Immutable Fields: Fields including `trustDomain`, `clusterName`, `bundleConfigMap`, `federation`, `bundleEndpoint` profile, and all `Persistence` settings (`size`, `accessMode`, and `storageClass`) are now immutable after initial creation.

* Customer action required:

** Review existing CR configurations to ensure compliance with the new validation rules.

Common configuration consolidation::

* Standard configuration options (`labels`, `resources`, `affinity`, `tolerations`, `nodeSelector`) are now standardized across all operand CRs via a shared `CommonConfig` structure.

Configuring log level and log format for the operands::

This release introduces flexible logging controls to improve observability and debugging across the platform:

* SPIRE Components: Users can now configure the `logLevel` (debug, info, warn, error) and `logFormat` (text, JSON) independently for `SpireServer`, `SpireAgent`, and `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider` directly within their CR specifications. The defaults are set to "info" for the `logLevel` and "text" for the `logFormat`.

> * Operator: The operator’s log verbosity is now configurable via the `OPERATOR_LOG_LEVEL` environment variable using klog’s `textlogger`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Operator: The Operator’s log verbosity is now configurable via the `OPERATOR_LOG_LEVEL` environment variable by using klog’s `textlogger`.
```

Author: Done

Refactor for create-only mode::

> By setting the `CREATE_ONLY_MODE` environment variable, users can prevent the operator from reconciling updates. This allows for manual resource modification without interference. If this mode is disabled, the Operator resumes enforcing the state and overwrites any manual changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By setting the `CREATE_ONLY_MODE` environment variable, users can prevent the Operator from reconciling updates. This allows for manual resource modification without interference. If this mode is disabled, the Operator resumes enforcing the state and overwrites any manual changes.
```
Check all "operator" entries on this PR.

Author: Done

> === Status and observability improvements

Author: Done

Enhanced status reporting::

* The main CR now aggregates status information from all operand CRs.

* New status conditions include Upgradeable (indicating a safe upgrade path) and Progressing (detailing deployment progress).

Operator metrics::

* Operator metrics are now exposed and secured with appropriate RBAC configuration.

* Integration is supported with the {product-title} monitoring stack.

[id="zero-trust-manager-1-0-0-bug-fixes_{context}"]
== Fixed issues

Enhanced Security Context Constraints for SPIRE Agent::
+
Before this update, the SPIRE Agent and SPIFFE CSI Driver containers were running as root user, leading to potential security violations. With this release, Security Context Constraints (SCC) have been configured to ensure these components no longer run as root. While privileged container mode is still required for necessary capabilities, this change reduces potential security risks for the user.
+
(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SPIRE-60[SPIRE-60])

SpireServer updates now propagate without operator restart::
+

> * Before this update, the operator failed to trigger reconciliation after updating the operand CR spec. As a consequence, user updates to SpireServer CR resources were not propagated to the StatefulSet, causing reconciliation to fail and changes to be ignored, leading to inconsistent resource allocation. With this release, the race condition between the manager and reconciler's cache to trigger reconciliation after CR updates has been fixed. As a result, day2 patch operations on SpireServer CRs will reliably trigger reconciliation, ensuring updated values are applied to the StatefulSet without manual operator restart.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Before this update, the operator failed to trigger reconciliation after updating the operand CR spec. As a consequence, user updates to `SpireServer` CR resources were not propagated to the `StatefulSet`, causing reconciliation to fail and changes to be ignored, leading to inconsistent resource allocation. With this release, the race condition between the manager and reconciler's cache to trigger reconciliation after CR updates has been fixed. As a result, day2 patch operations on `SpireServer` CRs will reliably trigger reconciliation, ensuring updated values are applied to the `StatefulSet` without manual operator restart.
```

Author: Done

> * Before this update, the Operator failed to trigger reconciliation after updating the operand CR spec. As a consequence, user updates to `SpireServer` CR resources were not propagated to the `StatefulSet`, causing reconciliation to fail and changes to be ignored, leading to inconsistent resource allocation. With this release, the race condition between the manager and reconciler's cache to trigger reconciliation after CR updates has been fixed. As a result, day2 patch operations on `SpireServer` CRs reliably trigger reconciliation, ensuring updated values are applied to the StatefulSet without manual operator restart.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Before this update, the Operator failed to trigger reconciliation after updating the operand CR spec. As a consequence, user updates to `SpireServer` CR resources were not propagated to the `StatefulSet`, causing reconciliation to fail and changes to be ignored, leading to inconsistent resource allocation. With this release, the race condition between the manager and reconciler's cache to trigger reconciliation after CR updates has been fixed. As a result, postinstallation patch operations on `SpireServer` CRs reliably trigger reconciliation, ensuring updated values are applied to the StatefulSet without manual operator restart.
```

Author: Done

+
* Before this update, the system unnecessarily created a custom security context constraint (SCC) for the OpenID Connect (OIDC) discovery provider, which increased the security footprint and configuration complexity even though the deployment did not require it. With this release, the custom SCC creation logic has been removed, resulting in a configuration where the OIDC discovery provider operates successfully without the extra security constraints.
+
(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SPIRE-190[SPIRE-190])

Fixed ConfigMap Reconciliation for SPIRE Controller Manager::
+
Before this update, Spire-controller manager ConfigMap reconciliation failed due to an unhandled edge case in the previous implementation. As a consequence, users experienced configuration inconsistencies. With this release, the Spire-controller manager ConfigMap reconciliation issue has been resolved. As a result, end users now experience seamless Spire-controller manager configuration.
+
(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SPIRE-195[SPIRE-195])

OIDC discovery provider now restarts automatically on configuration changes::
+

> * Before this update, the SPIRE OIDC discovery provider failed to automatically restart following `configmap` changes, leading to persistent authentication failures. With this release, updates to the CR now trigger an automatic pod restart, ensuring that `configmap` changes are applied immediately, providing a seamless experience for end users.

Reviewer 3: "seamless experience" is a very marketing-like term.

Author: Deleted everything after "immediately,"

+

> (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SPIRE-225[SPIRE-225])

Reviewer 3: Format change with bullet point needed?

<img width="977" height="483" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b65a2cf2-8b37-432d-9a2f-a93a998cdc63" />

Author: Done

Reviewer 3: One still out of place: 
<img width="1120" height="537" alt="Screenshot From 2026-05-19 14-20-23" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1551a10e-6888-4bd9-acd7-d3d4620319d6" />
